# Building and Running the IoT Warm Storage - Stream Analytics Aggregation Implementation

This Scenario Simulator simulates a large number of devices sending environmental readings for apartments in a smart building. 

The Scenario Simulator enables you to test the following:

1. All devices sending readings that are within the expected range. 

2. Some devices send readings indicating that the temperature is excessive (over 30 degrees Celsius).

You can download the code for the Scenario Simulator [here](../src/Simulator).

You should also download the [setup scripts](../setup) that create the Azure assets required by the Scenario Simulator.

## Prerequisites

You must have an Azure account with a subscription. You should also have installed the following software on your computer:

- [Visual Studio](https://www.visualstudio.com/)

- [Azure SDK for .NET (Visual Studio tools)](http://azure.microsoft.com/downloads/)

- [Azure Powershell](https://azure.microsoft.com/documentation/articles/powershell-install-configure/)

## Building the Scenario Simulator Solution

To build and provision the system, perform the following steps:

1. Download and install the NuGet packages and assemblies required by the solution.

2. Create the required Azure assets and services.

3. Verify the Stream Analytics configuration.

4. Build the solution.

The following sections describe these steps in more detail.

### Downloading and Installing the Required Assemblies

- Using Visual Studio, open the ScenarioSimulator solution.

- Rebuild the solution. This action downloads the various NuGet packages referenced by the solution and installs the appropriate assemblies.

> **Note:** The rebuild process should report an error: *Before building this project, please copy ScenarioSimulator.ConsoleHost.Template.config to ScenarioSimulator.ConsoleHost.config ...* You will do this in a later step. If the rebuild process displays any other errors then clean the solution and rebuild it again.

### Creating the Required Azure Assets and Services

> **Note:** Windows Powershell must be configured to run scripts. You can do this by running the following PowerShell command before continuing:
> 
> `set-executionpolicy unrestricted`

- Move to the folder containing the setup scripts.

- Run the following command:

	`.\Provision-WarmStorageAzureStreamAnalyticsAndSql.ps1`

-  At the *SubscriptionName* prompt, enter the name of your Azure account subscription.

- At the *ApplicationName* prompt, enter a name that will be used for a service bus namespace, event hub instance, and storage account.

- At the *SqlServerAdminPassword* prompt, enter a Sql Server admin account password.

- In the Sign in to Microsoft Azure dialog box, provide the credentials for your Azure account. 

- Wait while the script creates the Azure resources.

### Verifying the Stream Analytics Configuration

To verify that the configuration was successful, perform the following steps:

- Using the Azure web portal, open the Stream Analytics page.

- On the Stream Analytics page, verify that the following Stream Analytics jobs have been created.

	- [ApplicationName]ToSQL

	- In the menu bar click Inputs.

	- On the Inputs page, click the "Test Connection" button for each of the inputs.

	- On the Outputs page, click the "Test Connection" button for each of the outputs.


## Warm Storage - Stream Analytics Aggregation Implementation

The following sections describe how to run the simulator and Stream Analytics.

### Running the Simulator to Generate Events

Perform the following steps to run the simulator:

- Using Visual Studio, open the ScenarioSimulator solution and run the ScenarioSimualtor.ConsoleHost project.

- On the menu, select option 1 to provision the devices, then select option 2 (*Run NoErrorsExpected*). The simulator will generate events and echo their contents to the screen. The simulator should not report any exceptions.

- Allow the simulator to run for a few minutes and then press q.

- Press Enter to return to the menu.

### Start the Stream Analytics job:

- Using the Azure web portal, open the Stream Analytics page.

- Select [ApplicationName]ToSQL, and on the command bar click Start.

- In the Start Output dialog box, select Job Start Time and then click the tick button.

- Wait for the Stream Analytics job to start before continuing.

### Analyzing the Summary Data by Using a SQL Query

Perform the following steps to examine the summary data generated by Stream Analytics:

- Using the Azure web portal, open the SQL Databases page.

- Select the fabrikam database, and then in the command bar click Manage. The Azure SQL Database Management portal should open.

- On the log on page, in the Username box type "dbuser", in the Password box enter the password that you specified in response to the *SqlServerAdminPassword* prompt when you ran the provisioning script, and then click Log On.

- In the menu bar, click New Query.

- In the query editor, type `SELECT * FROM dbo.BuildingTemperature`

- In the menu bar, click Run. The results pane should display one or more rows displaying the average recorded temperature across all devices in each building over the last 5 seconds.


### Running the Simulator to Generate Events Indicating High Temperature

- Return to the Simulator (or restart it if you closed it earlier).

- On the menu, select option 2 (*Run ThirtyDegreeReadings*). The simulator will generate events that indicate that the temperatures reported by devices are 30 degrees Celsius (too hot to be comfortable).

- Allow the simulator to run for a few minutes and then press q.

- Press Enter to return to the menu.

- On the menu, select option 3 to quit the simulator.

- Return to the Azure SQL Database Management portal displaying the query `SELECT * FROM dbo.BuildingTemperature`, and in the menu bar click Run.

- Verify that the temperatures now reported by each building are 30 degrees Celsius.

