# Glossary

*This list will be sorted later*
<dl>

<dt>Cold Path</dt>
<dd>The processing pathway for data that is stored and handled later. This data can be pulled from storage for processing at a convenient time. The data can be held in relatively cheap, high capacity storage due to its potential volume and historical nature. The data is commonly used to provide statistical information, to generate analytical reports, and for auditing purposes.</dd>

<dt>Hot Path</dt>
<dd>The processing pathway for urgent data that is pushed to the IoT system from devices. This data typically requires immediate analysis. It is frequently used for raising alerts and other important notifications.</dd>

<dt>Warm Path</dt>
<dd>The processing path for device data that is not urgent but typically has a limited lifetime before it becomes stale. This data should be handled within a specified period of time. This data can also be used to augment the results generated by hot path processing to provide additional context. (The hot path must be fast and it might provide only limited information.) Examples of warm path data include diagnostic information for performance analysis, troubleshooting, or A/B testing. The data may need to be held in storage that is relatively quick to access (possibly more expensive than that required for the cold path), but the storage capacity is likely to be far less as this data is unlikely to be retained for an extended period.</dd>

<dt>Event</dt>
<dd>A message or data sent from the device. Generally assumed to have a body and
a header metadata.</dd>

<dt>Event Schema</dt>
<dd>The definition for the data transmitted in an event.</dd>

<dt>Device</dt>
<dd>A remote item that has the ability to interact with its physical
environment. The most common originator of events.</dd>

<dt>Field Gateway</dt>
<dd>A device that acts as a proxy for other devices that sits on-premise or in
the cloud. Primarily responsible for managing communication with the cloud
gateway.</dd>

<dt>Cloud Gateway</dt>
<dd>A cloud-hosted gateway that sits in between the device and the event
broker.</dd>

<dt>Event Broker</dt>
<dd>A partitioned store of events, such as Event Hub or Kafka. An event broker
acts as a buffer for load leveling and as a composition point in the
system.</dd>

<dt>Consumer Group</dt>
<dd>A logical service maintaining its own unique view over the stream of events
in the event broker.</dd>

</dl>
